Rest Client Reactive guide (#16441)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/rest-client-reactive.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Using the REST Client Reactive

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide explains how to use the REST Client Reactive in order to interact with REST APIs.
REST Client Reactive is a non-blocking counterpart of the RESTEasy REST Client.

> If you wish to both, use the client and expose REST endpoints from your application,

Author: I'll try to reword it :)

> it is advised to use link:resteasy-reactive.adoc[RESTEasy Reactive] as the server implementation.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be worded more strongly, i.e when using RESTEasy Reactive this client is absolutely preferred over the legacy `quarkus-rest-client`

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 1.8+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven {maven-version}

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `rest-client-reactive-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/rest-client-reactive-quickstart[directory].

== Creating the Maven project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=rest-client-reactive-quickstart \
    -DclassName="org.acme.rest.client.CountriesResource" \
    -Dpath="/country" \
    -Dextensions="resteasy-reactive,resteasy-reactive-jackson,rest-client-reactive,rest-client-reactive-jackson"
cd rest-client-reactive-quickstart
----

This command generates the Maven project with a REST endpoint and imports:

> * the `resteasy-reactive` and `resteasy-reactive-jackson` extensions for the REST server support;

Author: I did it this way to mimic what is done in the rest client guide, but true, that doesn't make sense. I'll change it

== Update the test

We also need to update the functional test to reflect the changes made to the endpoint.
Edit the `src/test/java/org/acme/rest/client/CountriesResourceTest.java` file and change the content of the `testCountryNameEndpoint` method to:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme.rest.client;

import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

import static io.restassured.RestAssured.given;
import static org.hamcrest.CoreMatchers.is;

@QuarkusTest
public class CountriesResourceTest {

    @Test
    public void testCountryNameEndpoint() {
        given()
          .when().get("/country/name/greece")
          .then()
             .statusCode(200)
             .body("$.size()", is(1),
                     "[0].alpha2Code", is("GR"),
                     "[0].capital", is("Athens"),
                     "[0].currencies.size()", is(1),
                     "[0].currencies[0].name", is("Euro")
             );
    }

}
----

The code above uses link:http://rest-assured.io/[REST Assured]'s link:https://github.com/rest-assured/rest-assured/wiki/GettingStarted#jsonpath[json-path] capabilities.

== Async Support

> To get the full power of the reactive nature of the client, you can use the asynchronous flavor of REST Client Reactive extension,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the full power of the reactive nature of the client, you can use the non-blocking flavor of REST Client Reactive extension,
```

Author: 👍🏻

    @GET
    @Path("/name/{name}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    CompletionStage<Set<Country>> getByNameAsync(@PathParam("name") String name);
}
----

Open the `src/main/java/org/acme/rest/client/CountriesResource.java` file and update it with the following content:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.rest.client;

import io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.rest.client.inject.RestClient;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import java.util.Set;
import java.util.concurrent.CompletionStage;

@Path("/country")
public class CountriesResource {

    @RestClient
    CountriesService countriesService;

    @GET
    @Path("/name/{name}")
    @Blocking
    public Set<Country> name(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return countriesService.getByName(name);
    }

    @GET
    @Path("/name-async/{name}")
    public CompletionStage<Set<Country>> nameAsync(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return countriesService.getByNameAsync(name);
    }
}
----

Please note that since the invocation is now non-blocking, we don't need the `@Blocking` annotation anymore on the endpoint.

> This means that the `nameAsync` method will be invoked on the event loop, i.e. will not get offloaded to a worker pool thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the `nameAsync` method will be invoked on the event loop, i.e. will not get offloaded to a worker pool thread and thus reducing hardware resource utilization.
```

Author: 👍🏻

    @Produces("application/json")
    Uni<Set<Country>> getByNameAsUni(@PathParam("name") String name);
}
----

The `CountriesResource` becomes:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.rest.client;

import io.smallrye.common.annotation.Blocking;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.rest.client.inject.RestClient;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.PathParam;
import java.util.Set;
import java.util.concurrent.CompletionStage;

@Path("/country")
public class CountriesResource {

    @RestClient
    CountriesService countriesService;

    // ...

    @GET
    @Path("/name-uni/{name}")
    public Uni<Set<Country>> nameUni(@PathParam("name") String name) {
        return countriesService.getByNameAsUni(name);
    }
}
----

[TIP]
.Mutiny
====
The previous snippet uses Mutiny reactive types, if you're not familiar with them, read the link:getting-started-reactive#mutiny[Getting Started with Reactive guide] first.
====

When returning a `Uni`, every _subscription_ invokes the remote service.
It means you can re-send the request by re-subscribing on the `Uni`, or use a `retry` as follows:

[source, java]
----

> @Inject @RestClient CountriesResource service;

Reviewer: `@Inject` isn't needed here as you have mentioned above :)

Author: 👍🏻

@Path("/v2")
@RegisterRestClient
@RegisterClientHeaders(RequestUUIDHeaderFactory.class)
public interface CountriesService {

    @GET
    @Path("/name/{name}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    Set<Country> getByName(@PathParam("name") String name);

    @GET
    @Path("/name/{name}")
    @Produces("application/json")
    CompletionStage<Set<Country>> getByNameAsync(@PathParam("name") String name);
}
----

And the `RequestUUIDHeaderFactory` would look like:

[source, java]
----
package org.acme.rest.client;

import org.eclipse.microprofile.rest.client.ext.ClientHeadersFactory;
import org.jboss.resteasy.specimpl.MultivaluedMapImpl;

import javax.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MultivaluedMap;
import java.util.UUID;

@ApplicationScoped
public class RequestUUIDHeaderFactory implements ClientHeadersFactory {

    @Override
    public MultivaluedMap<String, String> update(MultivaluedMap<String, String> incomingHeaders, MultivaluedMap<String, String> clientOutgoingHeaders) {
        MultivaluedMap<String, String> result = new MultivaluedMapImpl<>();
        result.add("X-request-uuid", UUID.randomUUID().toString());
        return result;
    }
}
----

> Any CDI bean matching the declared factory class will be picked up and can of course benefit from the usual CDI infrastructure.

Reviewer: It isn't really clear to me what this means - it kinda reads like I don't need to use `@RegisterClientHeaders` which isn't the case

Author: I'll fix the source and the copy
